---
title: "What happened on June 16, 2021, and how we make sure it never happens again"
date: 2021-06-27T00:00:00+01:00
author: "SimpleLogin team"
authorLink: "https://twitter.com/simple_login"
authorAvatar: "/logo-square.svg"
layout: "single-toc"
draft: false
summary: >
    On June 16, 2021, we have experienced important delays in email delivery that has caused several issues. We are deeply sorry for this incident. Here's what happened, the investigation, and how to prevent this incident from happening again in the future.


intro: >
    On June 16, 2021, we have experienced important delays in email delivery that has caused several issues. We are deeply sorry for this incident. Here's what happened, the investigation, and how to prevent this incident from happening again in the future.


---

### What happened

On this date, we have received emails from multiple users alerting us about hours of delay in email delivery. The same issue is also raised on SimpleLogin community on Reddit and Twitter.

### Immediate actions

We have immediately proceeded to some simple operations to unblock the issue as fast as possible:
- increase server capacity
- increase the number of email workers from 6 to 12
- restart all email related programs on our servers

Unfortunately, these operations don't seem to completely solve the issue. We also noticed the Postfix queue is abnormally full and flushing doesn't seem to empty the queue fast enough.

### Investigation

After looking at the log, there was a lot of `421 Retry later` SMTP status which seems to suggest an issue with the rate-limiting algorithm. The logs also suggest that all emails are coming from a single account that receives an abnormal amount of emails.

For the context, we have our own rate-limiting algorithm to avoid too many emails from being forwarded to a single mailbox that might lead to SimpleLogin server being blocked by a mailbox service. At that time, we are using a "soft" implementation that simply delays the email delivery when that happens by returning to Postfix a 421 status code and leaving the delay job to Postfix. 

This implementation turns out to be harmful in this situation as Postfix queue is full and delays by consequent other users messages.

We have immediately alerted the user in question and disabled the aliases that receive too many emails. After that, the Postfix queue is quickly coming back to an empty state and the email delivery becomes instant again.

### How to make sure this issue never happens again

This issue has allowed us to learn multiple important lessons

- Change to a more standard and aggressive approach in terms of rate-limiting. Popular email services simply return 550 status (i.e. bounces) when there are too many emails sent to the same mailbox in a short period of time. We decided to change our algorithm to use the same approach. This way, we don't run into the risk of having the Postfix queue full.

- Add more monitoring for the email delivery delay and Postfix queue. Have alerts properly set up so we can be informed when a similar issue is going to happen.

- When the issue happened, all the team is on vacation and we didn't react as fast as normally. We'll make sure to have better planning to always have at least an on-call team member.

- Make sure to highlight that SimpleLogin is for personal use and isn't meant to be a transactional or marketing email service. Any robot-like usage on SimpleLogin is prohibited.

### Conclusion

We are grateful for the support from our community during this incident. Though we have more and more automatic monitoring, please send us an email at hi[at]simplelogin.io, tag our [Twitter account](https://twitter.com/simple_login), or [Reddit account](https://www.reddit.com/user/RealSimplelogin/) whenever you notice anything abnormal.





